Hi, everybody.
It was five years ago this week
that a financial crisis
on Wall Street spread to Main
Street, and very nearly turned
a recession into a depression.
In a matter of months, millions
of Americans were robbed
of their jobs, their homes,
their savings - after a decade
in which they'd already been
working harder and harder
to just get by.
It was a crisis from which
we're still trying to recover.
But thanks to the grit and
determination of the American
people, we are
steadily recovering.
Over the past three and a half
years, our businesses have
created seven and a
half million new jobs.
Our housing market is healing.
We've become less
dependent on foreign oil.
Health care costs are growing
at the slowest rate in 50 years.
And in just over a week,
millions of Americans without
health care will be able to get
covered for
less than $100 a month.
So our economy is
gaining traction.
And we're finally tackling
threats to middle-class
prosperity that Washington
neglected for far too long.
But as any middle-class family
listening right now knows,
we've got a long way to go to
get to where we need to be.
And after five years spent
digging out of crisis, the last
thing we need is for Washington
to manufacture another.
But that's what will happen in
the next few weeks if Congress
doesn't meet two deadlines.
First: the most basic
Constitutional duty Congress
has is passing a budget.
But if it doesn't pass one
before September 30th -
a week from Monday - the
government will shut down.
And so will many services
the American people expect.
Military personnel, including
those deployed overseas, won't
get their paychecks on time.
Federal loans for rural
communities, small business
owners, and new home
buyers will be frozen.
Critical research into
life-saving discoveries
and renewable energy will
be immediately halted.
All of this will be prevented if
Congress just passes a budget.
Second: Congress must authorize
the Treasury
to pay America's bills.
This is done with a simple,
usually routine vote to raise
what's called the debt ceiling.
Since the 1950s, Congress has
always passed it, and every
President has signed it -
Democrats and Republicans,
including President Reagan.
And if this Congress doesn't do
it within the next few weeks,
the United States will default
on its obligations and put our
entire economy at risk.
This is important: raising the
debt ceiling is not the same
as approving more spending.
It lets us pay for what
Congress already spent.
It doesn't cost a dime, or
add a penny to our deficit.
In fact, right now, our deficits
are already falling
at the fastest rate since the
end of World War II.
And by the end of this year,
we'll have cut our deficits
by more than half
since I took office.
But reducing our deficits and
debt isn't even what the current
standoff in Congress
seems to be all about.
The fact is Democrats and some
reasonable Republicans are
willing to raise the debt
ceiling and pass a sensible
budget - one that cuts spending
on what we don't need so we can
invest in what we do.
And I want to work with those
Democrats and Republicans
on a better bargain for
the middle class.
But there's also a faction on
the far right of the Republican
party who've convinced their
leadership to threaten
a government shutdown if they
can't shut off
the Affordable Care Act.
Some are actually willing to
plunge America into default
if they can't defund the
Affordable Care Act.
Think about that.
They'd actually plunge this
country back into recession -
all to deny the basic security
of health care
to millions of Americans.
Well, that's not happening.
And they know it's
not happening.
The United States of America
is not a deadbeat nation.
We are a compassionate nation.
We are the world's
bedrock investment.
And doing anything to
threaten that
is the height of irresponsibility.
That's why I will not negotiate
over the full faith and credit
of the United States.
I will not allow anyone to harm
this country's reputation,
or threaten to inflict economic
pain on millions of our own
people, just to make
an ideological point.
So, we are running out
of time to fix this.
But we could fix it tomorrow.
Both houses of Congress can take
a simple vote to pay our bills
on time, then work together
to pass a budget on time.
Then we can declare an end to
governing by crisis and govern
responsibly, by putting our
focus back where it should
always be - on creating new
jobs, growing our economy,
and expanding opportunity not
just for ourselves,
but for future generations.
Thanks.